1.10 Problem solving
Programming languages vs. problem solving
A chef may write a new recipe in English, but creating a new recipe involves more than just knowing English. Similarly, creating a new
program involves more than just knowing a programming language. Programming is largely about problem solving: creating a methodical
solution to a given task.
The following are real-life problem-solving situations encountered by one of this material's authors.
Example 1.10.1: Solving a (nonprogramming) problem: Matching socks.
A person stated a dislike for mismatching socks after doing laundry, indicating there were three kinds of socks. A friend suggested just
putting the socks in a drawer and finding a matching pair each morning. The person said that finding a matching pair could take forever:
Pulling out a first sock and then pulling out a second, placing them back and repeating until the second sock matches the first could go
on many times (5, 10, or more).
The friend provided a better solution approach: Pull out a first sock, then pull out a second, and repeat (without placing back) until a pair
matches. In the worst case, if three kinds of socks exist, then the fourth sock will match one of the first three.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.10.1: Matching socks solution approach.
Exactly three pairs of socks (types A, B, and C) exist in a drawer.
1) If sock type A is pulled first, sock type B second, and sock type C
third, the type of the fourth sock pulled must match one of A, B, or C.
True
False
2) If socks are pulled one at a time and kept until a match is found, at
least four pulls are necessary.
True
False
3) If socks are pulled two at a time and put back if not matching, and
the process is repeated until the two pulled socks match, the
maximum number of pulls is 4.
True
False
Example: Greeting people
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.10.2: Greeting people problem.
An organizer of a 64-person meeting wants to start by having every person individually greet each other person for 30 seconds.
Indicate whether the proposed solution achieves the goal without using excessive time. Before answering, think of a possible
solution approach for this seemingly simple problem.
1) Form an inner circle of 32 and an outer circle of 32, with people
matched up. Every 30 seconds, have the outer circle shift left one
position.
Yes
No
2) Pair everyone randomly. Every 30 seconds, tell everyone to find
someone new to greet. Do this 63 times.
Yes
No
3) Have everyone form a line. Then have everyone greet the person
behind them.
Yes
No
4) Have everyone form a line. Have the first person greet the other 63
people for 30 seconds each. Then have the second person greet
each other person for 30 seconds each (skipping anyone already
met). And so on.
Yes
No
5) Form two lines of 32 each, with attendees matched up. Every 30
seconds, have one line shift left one position (with the person on the
left end wrapping to right). Once the person that started on the left is
back on the left, then have each line split into two matched lines, and
repeat until each line has just 1 person.
Yes
No
Example: Sorting name tags
Example 1.10.2: Example: Sorting name tags.
1,000 name tags were printed and sorted by first name into a stack. A person wishes to instead sort the tags by last name. Two
approaches to solving the problem are:
Solution approach 1: For each tag, insert that tag into the proper location in a new last-name-sorted stack.
Solution approach 2: For each tag, place the tag into one of 26 substacks, one for last names starting with A, one for B, etc. Then,
for each substack's tags (like the A stack), insert that tag into the proper location of a last-name-sorted stack for that letter. Finally
combine the stacks in order (A's stack on top, then B's stack, etc.).
Solution approach 1 will bevery hard; finding the correct insertion location in the new sorted stack will take time once that stack has
about 100 or more items. Solution approach 2 is faster, because initially dividing into the 26 stacks is easy, and then each stack is
relatively small, so insertions are easier to do.
In fact, sorting is a common problem in programming, and solution approach 2 is similar to a well-known sorting approach called radix
sort.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.10.3: Sorting name tags.
1,000 name tags are to be sorted by last name by first placing tags into 26 unsorted substacks (for A's, B's, etc.), then sorting each
substack.
1) If last names are equally distributed among the alphabet, what is the
largest number of name tags in any one substack?
1
39
1,000
2) Suppose the time to place an item into one of the 26 sub-stacks is 1
second. How many seconds are required to place all 1000 name tags
onto a sub-stack?
26 sec
1,000 sec
26,000 sec
3) When sorting each substack, suppose the time to insert a name tag
into the appropriate location of a sorted N-item sub-stack is N * 0.1
sec. If the largest substack is 50 tags, what is the longest time to
insert a tag?
5 sec
50 sec
4) Suppose the time to insert a name tag into an N-item stack is N * 0.1
sec. How many seconds are required to insert a name tag into the
appropriate location of a 500-item stack?
5 sec
50 sec
A programmer usually should carefully create a solution approach before writing a program. Like English being used to describe a recipe,
the programming language is just a description of a solution approach to a problem; creating a good solution should be done first.
Credit: Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Public Domain License https://openclipart.org/detail/213977/simple-sock