"My program is correct, but the system is complaining about output whitespace."
1.12 Why whitespace matters
Whitespace and precise formatting
For program output, whitespace  is any blank space or newline. Most coding activities strictly require a student program's output to exactly
match the expected output, including whitespace. Students learning programming often complain:
However, correctness often includes output being formatted correctly.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.12.1: Precisely formatting a meeting invite.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.12.2: Program correctness includes correctly-formatted output.
Consider the example above.
1) The programmer on the left intentionally inserted a newline in the
first sentence, namely "Kia Smith... video meeting". Why?
Probably a mistake
So the text appears less jagged
To provide some randomness to the output
2) The programmer on the right did not end the first sentence with a
newline. What effect did that omission have?
"Join meeting" appears on the same line
No effect
3) The programmer on the left neatly formatted the link, the "Phone:"
text, and phone numbers. What did the programmer on the right do?
Also neatly formatted those items
Output those items without neatly formatting
4) On the right, why did the "Reminder..." text appear on the same line as
the separator text "------"?
Because programs behave erratically
Because the programmer didn't end the output with a newline
5) Whitespace _____ important in program output.
is
is not
Programming is all about precision
Programming is all about precision. Programs must be created precisely to run correctly. Ex:
= and == have different meanings.
Using i where j was meant can yield a hard-to-find bug.
Declaring a variable as int when char was needed can cause confusing errors.
Not considering that n could be 0 in sum/n can cause a program to fail entirely in rare but not insignificant cases.
The difference between typing x/2 vs. x/2.0 can have huge impacts.
Counting from i being 0 to i < 10 vs. i <= 10 can mean the difference between correct output and a program outputting garbage.
In programming, every little detail counts. Programmers must get in a mindset of paying extreme attention to detail.
Thus, another reason for caring about whitespace in program output is to help new programmers get into a "precision" mindset when
programming. Paying careful attention to details like whitespace instructions, carefully examining feedback regarding whitespace
differences, and then modifying a program to exactly match expected whitespace is an exercise in strengthening attention to detail. Such
attention can lead programmers to make fewer mistakes when creating programs, thus spending less time debugging, and instead
creating programs that work correctly.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.12.3: Thinking precisely, and attention to detail.
Programmers benefit from having a mindset of thinking precisely and paying attention to details. The following questions
emphasize attention to detail. See if you can get all of the questions correct on the first try.
1) How many times is the letter F (any case) in the following?
If Fred is from a part of France, then of course Fred's French is good.
2) How many differences are in these two lines?
Printing A linE is done using println
Printing A linE is done using print1n
3) How many typos are in the following common phrase?
Keep calmn and cary on.
4) If I and E are adjacent, I should come before E, except after C (where
E should come before I). How many violations are in the following?
BEIL
CEIL
ZIEL
YIEIK
TREIL
5) A password must start with a letter, be at least 6 characters long,
include a number, not include any whitespace, and include a special
symbol. How many of the following passwords are valid?
hello
goodbye
Maker1
dog!three
Oops_again
1augh#3
CHALLENGE
ACTIVITY 1.12.1: Whitespace and attention to detail.
620890.5010016.qx3z qy7 
The following code contains at least one whitespace error. Find and fix the error(s) so the program reads numHandbags from
input, and outputs "The filmmaker wants " followed by numHandbags, " handbags.", and a newline.
Ex: If the input is 7, then the output is:
The filmmaker wants 7 handbags.
1
2
3
Programmer attention to details
The focus needed to answer the above correctly on the first try is the kind of focus needed to write correct programs. Due to this
fact, some employers give "attention to detail" tests to people applying for programming positions. Web search for "attention to detail
in programming" for examples of such tests.
How was this section? | 
Kia Smith is inviting you
to a video meeting.
Join meeting:
  http://www.zoomskype.us/5592
Phone:
  1-669-555-2634 (San Jose)
  1-929-555-4000 (New York)
Meeting ID: 5592
-------------------------
Reminder: 10 min before
Kia Smith is inviting you to a video
meeting. Join meeting:
http://www.zoomskype.us/5592 Phone:
1-669-555-2634 (San Jose)
1-929-555-4000 (New York)
Meeting ID: 5592
------------------------- Reminder: 10 min
before

#include  <iostream>
using  namespace  std ;
int  main ( )  {
   int  numHandbags ;
   cin  >>  numHandbags ;  // Reads numHandbags from input
   cout  <<  " The film maker wants "  <<  numHandbags  <<  "  hand bags. "  <<  endl ;
   return  0 ;
}