1.11 Why programming
Computing careers
While careers in law, medicine, and engineering have existed for hundreds of years, computers are relatively new so careers in computing
are new too. Today, computing jobs are often ranked among the best jobs, in terms of opportunity, salary, work-life balance, job security, job
satisfaction, work conditions, etc. Nearly all computing jobs require some training in programming; some jobs then focus on programming,
while others instead focus on related aspects.
In a 2022 ranking (below), the top job is information security analyst (in the field of cybersecurity) and software developer is #5. Note:
Rankings from different sources vary greatly; some have more engineers, human resources managers, data scientists, marketing, etc. Also,
the specific ordering in a ranking is not usually substantial (like rank #2 vs. #5), and rankings change every year. However, note that most
rankings consistently have several computing jobs in the top tier.
Table 1.11.1: Best jobs of 2022, per U.S. News and World Report.
The rankings are based on growth potential, work-life balance, and salary.
Ranking Occupation Description
1 Information Security Analyst Carries out security measures to protect company networks.
2-4 Nurse Practitioner, Physician's Assistant, Medical and Health
Services Manager
5 Software Developer Designs computer programs, combining creativity and
technical know-how, often working in teams.
6 Data Scientist
7-12 Financial Manager, Statistician, Lawyer, Speech-Language
Pathologist, Physician, Registered Nurse
13 IT Manager Coordinate computer related activities for a company or
organization.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.1: Computing jobs are often ranked among the best jobs.
1) What factor was used to rank the best jobs?
Salary
Job security
Multiple factors were considered
2) Software developers spend nearly all their time alone at a computer.
True
False
3) Interestingly, the above list is dominated by jobs in what two general
areas?
Computing and healthcare
Computing and manufacturing
Types of computing jobs
Table 1.11.2: Computing jobs.
A wide variety of computing jobs exist.
Occupation Job Summary Entry-level education 2021 median pay
Computer and Information
Research Scientists
Computer and information research scientists invent
and design new approaches to computing
technology and find innovative uses for existing
technology. They study and solve complex problems
in computing for business, medicine, science, and
other fields.
Master's degree $131,490
Computer Network
Architects
Computer network architects design and build data
communication networks, including local area
networks (LANs), wide area networks (WANs), and
intranets. These networks range from a small
connection between two offices to a multinational
series of globally distributed communications
systems.
Bachelor's degree $120,520
Computer Programmers
Computer programmers write code to create
software programs. They turn the program designs
created by software developers and engineers into
instructions that a computer can follow.
Bachelor's degree $93,000
Computer Support
Specialists
Computer support specialists provide help and
advice to people and organizations using computer
software or equipment. Some, called computer
network support specialists, support information
technology (IT) employees within their organization.
Others, called computer user support specialists,
assist non-IT users who are having computer
problems.
Varies: High-school
degree and higher $57,910
Computer Systems
Analysts
Computer systems analysts study an organization's
current computer systems and procedures and
design information systems solutions to help the
organization operate more eficiently and effectively.
They bring business and information technology (IT)
together by understanding the needs and limitations
of both.
Bachelor's degree $99,270
Database Administrators
Database administrators (DBAs) use specialized
software to store and organize data, such as financial
information and customer shipping records. They
make sure that data are available to users and are
secure from unauthorized access.
Bachelor's degree $101,000
Information Security
Analysts
Information security analysts plan and carryout
security measures to protect an organization's
computer networks and systems. Their
responsibilities are continually expanding as the
number of cyberattacks increase.
Bachelor's degree $102,600
Network and Computer
Systems Administrators
Computer networks are critical parts of almost every
organization. Network and computer systems
administrators are responsible for the day-to-day
operation of these networks.
Bachelor's degree $80,600
Software Developers
Software developers are the creative minds behind
computer programs. Some develop the applications
that allow people to do specific tasks on a computer
or other device. Others develop the underlying
systems that run the devices or control networks.
Bachelor's degree $109,020
Web Developers
Web developers design and create websites. They
are responsible for the look of the site. They are also
responsible for the site's technical aspects, such as
performance and capacity, which are measures of a
website's speed and how much trafic the site can
handle. They also may create content for the site.
Associate's degree $78,300
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.2: Computing jobs.
Refer to the above BLS table of computing jobs.
Likely requires both a strong knowledge of computer technology, and
excellent interpersonal skills due to dealing with non-technical users.
Create, design, and program software.
Help write programs created by software developers.
Help organizations use computing technology to operate effectively.
Requires strong combination of business and computing technology
knowledge.
Focus on protecting an organization's computers and data. Increasingly
important as "hackers" continue to steal huge amounts of data, as widely-
publicized in recent years.
Build websites, which may involve the look/feel, the content, the
performance of the site, and more.
For many non-computing jobs (dentist, attorney, nurse, business, etc.), computer usage is high, and thus knowledge of computing
technology can yield strong advantages even for people not in a computing career.
Programming and non-computing jobs
Many people in non-computing jobs find that knowing some programming can benefit their careers. Some examples:
Kelly majored in chemistry and now works as a scientist in a pharmaceutical company. Kelly helps analyze
clinical trials. Her company uses commercial statistical software, but she found that writing small custom
programs yielded even better analyses. Her co-workers now come to her for help. She is glad she took a
required programming class in college, though at the time she wasn't as happy about it.
Paul majored in civil engineering and now authors technical content for a large company. Paul noticed that
several authoring tasks done in Google Docs by the in-house 25-person authoring team could be automated.
Building on the programming he learned in a required college course, Paul spent several hours online learning
about Google Docs "add on" programming, and wrote two small add-ons. His add-on programs have become
part of the standard authoring process for the entire team, who frequently thanks Paul for saving them time and relieving them of
tedious tasks.
Ethan majored in business and got a job in sales operations of a Silicon Valley startup company. Building on the C++ programming he
learned from a college course, he started tinkering with writing database query programs using "SQL", and discovered he had a knack
for it. His job duties have expanded to include running database reports, and he has automated dozens of reports via programming,
helping people throughout the company be more productive.
Eva (pictured here) majored in environmental science. She voluntarily took a programming course in college believing the
knowledge/skills could be important to her. She took a job at a startup company doing various marketing tasks. She began to
manage the company's website, and realized that a few small programs could make the web pages dynamic and interactive. She
wrote the code herself, which was reviewed and approved by the engineering team and became part of the company's live website.
She plans on getting a graduate degree in environmental science and expects programming will be useful in her research.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.3: Programming in non-computing jobs.
Consider the examples above.
1) Kelly voluntarily took a programming course in college.
True
False
2) Ethan learned SQL programming in a college course and now applies
SQL programming in his job.
True
False
3) Eva voluntarily took a programming class in college.
True
False
Precision, logic, and computational thinking
Many people find that programming encourages precise, logical thought that can lead to better writing and speaking, clearer processes,
and more. The thought processes needed to build correct, precise, logical programs is sometimes called computational thinking and has
benefits beyond programming.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.4: Learning programming tends to aid in precise, logical thought, aspects of computational thinking.
New programmers often complain about how unforgiving programming is, but such attention to detail is one of the benefits of learning
programming.
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.5: Computational thinking.
1)
How many minutes did you spend?
__ Under 5
__ 6 or more
What's wrong with this survey question?
Should say "More than 6" instead of "6 or more".
Exactly 5 minutes is not a choice
2) An online shopping site allows setting up a recurring order. A person
needs to determine the order frequency for laundry detergent. One
bottle does 64 loads. He does a load a week. His wife does a load a
week. His daughter does a load every two weeks. What's the best
frequency?
Every 24 weeks
Every 32 weeks
Every 64 weeks
You've never done anything like this
Programming is different than nearly anything most students have done before. Most new programmers initially struggle. Just as a child
learning to walk will stumble and fall, a student learning to program will stumble and fall many times as well.
Programs have literally transformed the world in the past few decades. But, correct programs are hard to create. Programs are among the
most sophisticated of human creations. Even one wrong symbol in a program with thousands of characters can cause the program to
entirely fail. And programs deal with doing long sequences of tasks over time. Such features are not common in other aspects of life.
Programming is a combination of concepts and skill. The skill part is not as common in other "academic" subjects. Learning to program
thus requires practice. A student cannot watch a piano teacher play and then walk away playing piano. Writing correct expressions, properly
formed if-else branches, correctly working loops, etc., requires repeated attempts, and, like the new piano player, lots of mistakes along the
way.
Programming also requires a lot of mental energy. No easy steps exist for how to solve a given problem by writing a program. Many
students are not accustomed to having to think so hard to solve a problem, instead looking to follow standard steps or just trying to "look
up the answer".
Students studying programming are about to embark on one of the most rewarding but also the most challenging of human endeavours.
When stuck, students may wish to take solace that everyone struggles. Like the child learning to walk, each fall hurts, but know that each
fall brings one closer to learning a powerful skill.
Even the best programmers make mistakes
Even the best programmers make mistakes. In San Diego 2012, a software bug caused 17-minutes of fireworks to launch nearly
simultaneously.
Video 1.11.1: When software goes wrong...
PARTICIPATION
ACTIVITY 1.11.6: Programming.
1) For most people, programming comes easy.
True
False
2) If a student has trouble converting a problem statement into a
program, the teacher and/or learning content must have done a poor
job.
True
False
Workers will be painting offices on Monday.
The painters will have ID tags.
They are white and brown.
Inform the contractors of special requests.
Programmers use variables
each with one unique name
Painters will be painting offices on Monday.
The painters will have ID tags.
The ID tags are white and brown.
Inform the painters of special requests.
People within 50 miles must drive.
People under 25 miles may take a taxi.
People over 300 miles may fly. 
Travel policies for the conference
Programmers use if-else
statements to distinguish cases
If distance < 25 miles
     Options are drive or taxi
Else if distance >= 25 and <= 300 miles
     Only option is drive
Else if distance > 300 miles
     Options are drive or fly
1. Common English usage may be vague. Are workers, painters, and contractors the same people or different? What exactly is
white and brown?
2. Programs use one word per item; no synonyms, no pronouns. In English, using "painters" consistently, and replacing "they" with
"The IDs", yields precise info.
3. Policies and other documents often aren't logical, with conflicting or missing info. How can a person 20 miles away take a taxi if
they must drive? What about 100 miles?
4. Programmers use precise structures like "If-else" statements. When used in English, the result is logical, unambiguous info.
Some call this "computational thinking".