1.1 Programming (general)
Computer program basics
Computer programs are abundant in many people's lives today, carrying out applications on smartphones, tablets, and laptops, powering
businesses like Amazon and Netflix, helping cars drive and planes fly, and much more.
A computer program consists of instructions executing one at a time. Basic instruction types are:
Input: A program gets data, perhaps from a file, keyboard, touchscreen, network, etc.
Process: A program performs computations on that data, such as adding two values like x + y.
Output: A program puts that data somewhere, such as to a file, screen, network, etc.
Programs use variables to refer to data, like x, y, and z below. The name is due to a variable's value varying as a program assigns a variable
like x with new values.

A program is like a recipe
Some people think of a program as being like a cooking recipe. A recipe consists of instructions that a chef executes, like adding
eggs or stirring ingredients. Likewise, a computer program consists of instructions that a computer executes, like multiplying
numbers or outputting a number to a screen.
Baking chocolate chip cookies from a recipe
1. Mix one stick of butter and one cup of sugar.
2. Add egg and mix until combined.
3. Stir in flour and chocolate.
4. Bake at 350°F for 8 minutes.
A first programming activity
Below is a simple tool that allows a user to rearrange some prewritten instructions (in no particular programming language). The tool
illustrates how a computer executes each instruction one at a time, assigning variable m with new values throughout and outputting
("printing") values to the screen.

Computational thinking
Mathematical thinking became increasingly important throughout the industrial age to enable people to successfully live and work. In the
information age, many people believe computational thinking, or creating a sequence of instructions to solve a problem, will become
increasingly important for work and everyday life. A sequence of instructions that solves a problem is called an algorithm.