
4.1 Loops (general)
Loop concept
People who have children may be familiar with looping around the block until a baby falls asleep.

Loop basics
A loop  is a program construct that repeatedly executes the loop's statements (known as the loop body ) while the loop's expression is true;
when the expression is false, execution proceeds past the loop. Each time through a loop's statements is called an iteration.

Example: Counting specific values in a list
Programs execute one statement at a time. Thus, using a loop to examine a list of values one value at a time and updating variables along
the way, as in the above examples, is a common programming task.
Below is a task to help a person get accustomed to examining a list of values one value at a time. The task asks a person to count the
number of negative values, incrementing a variable to keep count.

Example: Finding the max value
Examining items one at a time and updating a variable can achieve some interesting computations. The task below is to find the maximum
value in a list of positive values. A variable stores the max value seen so far. This variable is initialized with the first input value. Each
following input value is compared with the stored max value, and if greater, the input value replaces the max value.

1. A loop is like a branch, but the loop jumps back to the expression when done. Thus, the loop's statements may execute multiple
times Before execution proceeds past the loop.
2. This program receives an input value. If the value > -1, the program adds the value to a sum, receives another input, and repeats.
val is 2, so the loop's statements execute, making sum 2.
3. The loop's statements ended by receiving the next input, which is 4. The loop's expression 4 > -1 is true, so the loop's statements
execute again, making sum 2 + 4 or 6.
4. The loop's statements receive the next input of 1. The loop's expression 1 > -1 is true, so the loop's statements execute a third
time, making sum 6 + 1 or 7.
5. The next input is -1. This time, -1 > -1 is false, so the loop is not entered. Instead, execution proceeds past the loop, where a
statement puts sum, which is 7, to the output.Captions
Feedback?
Put avg to outputavg = sum / numsum = sum + val
num = num + 1
val = Get next inputWhile  val > -1val = Get next inputnum = 0sum = 0
Output249-1Input3210 num:15620 sum:
5
1. The program computes an average of a list of numbers (a negative ends the list). The first input is 2, so the loop is entered. Sum
becomes 2, and num is incremented to 1.
2. The next input is 4. The loop is entered, so sum becomes 2 + 4 or 6, and num is incremented to 2.
3. The next input is 9, so the loop is entered. Sum becomes 6 + 9 or 15, and num is incremented to 3.
4. The next input is -1, so the loop is not entered. 15 / 3 or 5 is output.Captions
